sig-release: Add release cadence KEP (#2567)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-release/2572-release-cadence/README.md

  - Should we just do this all of the time post-release?
- (to Josh) What did we discover regarding feature trajectory?

Thoughts:
I would want requesters to be very explicit about the kind of data we're interested in.
SIG Release and others can work on collection, but we need to make sure this isn't a continually moving target.

We're also starting from a disadvantage trying to compare our status quo to something we haven't tried for a sustained period of time.

#### TODO Blocking upgrade tests

Aaron C:

> Can we make upgrade jobs / tests blocking to make the upgrade between versions better

#### TODO More automation

@vincepri:

> There is not enough automation (true for probably all our projects and repositories).

#### TODO Improve visibility

@vincepri:

> Changes are hard to keep up with, and sometimes important things are buried in release notes.

#### TODO More policy

@vincepri:

> Some fear that less releases without policies (read: saying "no" more) isn't enough.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

#### TODO Release Team

@saschagrunert:

> > On the other hand it will give less people a chance to participate in the shadowing program for example. Anyways, I think we will find appropriate solutions around those kind of new challenges.

Author: Marked as out-of-scope in 8d84fcbdb208b27db9187edec05d56937e048bec.
Separate issue to discuss opened here: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1494

@jeremyrickard:

> The one downside is that we will remove an opportunity for shadowing, and as we saw this time around we had >100 people apply, and this will remove ~24-ish opportunities. I think we can maybe identify some opportunities for folks that want to be involved though. takes off release lead hat

@wilsonehusin:

> as someone who started getting involved in this project through shadowing release team, I'd like to echo what @saschagrunert & @jeremyrickard raised above regarding shadow opportunities -- I'm glad we're acknowledging the downside and hope we can keep in mind to present other opportunities for folks to get involved!

@kcmartin:

> As to the potential for limiting shadow opportunities (mentioned by @jeremyrickard, @wilsonehusin, and others), I'm definitely tuned in to that being a downside, since I've served as a SIG-Release shadow three times, and I think it's a fantastic opportunity!
>
> One possible way to alleviate that downside would be to have 5 shadows, instead of three or four, per sub-team. I believe this is still a manageable number for the Leads, and could distribute the work more evenly.

@pires:

> > On a more personal note, (@jeremyrickard wink, wink) I applied for release shadow believing I'd be picked given my past contributions to the project and my justification to be selected over others. Being rejected was a humbling experience and I'm happy to let you know I didn't lose any of the appetite to contribute. Others may feel differently but, then again, the project is maturing and so should the community.

Reviewer: Depending on how many shadows we select per role, we could state that we now select more shadows with a cadence of 3 releases per year.

Author: Marked as out-of-scope in 8d84fcbdb208b27db9187edec05d56937e048bec.
Separate issue to discuss opened here: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1494

@jberkus:

>         Extra month for flakes/failures to get worse if nobody looks at them until Code Freeze
>
>     I think risk this can be reduced if we adjust (increase) the code freeze period.
>
> Better, how about we keep on top of flakes even if it's not Code Freeze?

@alculquicondor:

>     Better, how about we keep on top of flakes even if it's not Code Freeze?
>
> Absolutely, but it's not easy to enforce without hurting development of non-violators.

@jberkus:

> Shutting down merges is the nuclear option for preventing flakes and fails. We should be able to keep on top of them without resorting to that. But ... we're getting off topic here, unless folks think the "increased time to flake" is a blocker for this (I don't).

#### TODO Attention to dependencies

@jberkus:

> Extra problems with upstream dependency patch support if our timing is bad

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> ### TODO Schedule

Reviewer: Read through the comments to collect the input.I think we can layout a lightweight policy, for example:

1. Always start the first release at the beginning of a year (ideally not the first week of January).
2. Always end the last release by mid December.
3. Choose a cycle length of ~15 weeks.
4. Consider KubeCon as a full week where no development and decision making happens.

@mpbarrett:

> Which months (ie April, August, Dec would be every 4 months from the beginning of a year) would be important for me as a user to know.

@OmerKahani:

> @tpepper for your question - the best month for us will be March, July, November-December.

@khenidak:

> @tpepper would be great if we add to this post typical kubecon(s) schedule, since most the community (those who are reviewing, approving, building, releasing changes) is also heavily engaged in these events.

@jberkus:

> My vote is for symmetric releases in April, August, and December. While it's tempting to make December an "off month", development does happen all the time, and if it's not on a release, what is it on?
>
> That would be a reason for my 2nd choice, which would be Symmetric March, July, November, which puts Slow December at the beginning of the cycle instead of the end. However, that's mainly a benefit for working around Kubecon November, and there's no good reason to believe that Kubecon will be happening in November 2 years from now; it might be September or October instead.

#### TODO Impact to existing deadlines

@cblecker:

> > We should also talk about how this may impact things like code freeze (longer feature freeze with only bug/scale/stability fixes?).

Reviewer: We continuously improve our release schedule together with the currently available processes. I think we should not go too deep into the rabbit whole here, and explicitly mention that it's in the responsibility of the SIG to decide the deadlines within a cycle on a per-release basis.

@youngnick:

> The consensus on LTS (meaning multi-year support for a single version) is, in short, there's no consensus. We in the LTS WG worked for over two years, and we were able to get everyone to agree to extend the support window to one year (from nine months), which I think speaks to the passion that everyone has about this, the diversity of the use cases Kubernetes is supporting, and the community's determination to get it right.
>
> Speaking personally, I think that LTS is a long way away, if ever - it would require a lot more stability in the core than we have right now. With efforts like all the work to pull things out of tree, and the general movement towards adding new APIs outside of the core API group, I think it's plausible that one day, we may get to a place where we could consider it, but I don't think it's likely for some time, if ever. @tpepper, @jberkus, @LiGgit, and @dims among others may have thoughts here. :)

@jberkus:

> @youngnick you summed it up. Having 2 years of support for a specific API snapshot is unrealistic right now for all sorts of reasons, and it wasn't even clear that it was what people actually wanted.

> ### TODO Go faster

Reviewer: The discussion is interesting. Nevertheless I think the KEP should state, that any effort of "moving faster" is out of scope, where we only focus on the release cadence here.

Author: Mark as out-of-scope in 496acf1ce6a586810e753e46a8d0c65d792544ad.
Separate discussion opened here: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/1495

@sftim:

> If there were an unsupported-but-tested Kubernetes release cut and published once a week - what would that mean?
>
> I'm imagining something that passes the conformance tests (little point otherwise) but comes with no guarantee. The Rust project has a model a bit like this with a daily unstable release which has nevertheless been through lots of automated testing.
>
> When I'm typing this I'm imagining that I could run minikube start --weekly-unstable and get a local test cluster based on the most recent release. If Kubernetes already had that built and working, would people pick different answers?

@jberkus:

> @sftim yeah, you've noticed that the reason, right now, we don't see a lot of community testing on alphas and betas is that we don't make them easy to consume.
>
> I'd say that it would need to go beyond that: we'd need images, minikube, and kubeadm releases for each weekly release.
>
> I don't know how that would affect our choice of major release cadence (isn't it orthagonal?) but it would be a great thing to do regardless. Also very hard.

> ### TODO Maintenance releases

Reviewer: I would mark this as out of scope of the KEP.

Author: Mark as out-of-scope in 240e8b7d6bc2e0bd12115001c197558f067451ae.
Separate discussion opened here: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/1495

releases 4 times per year, are ongoing in the community.

The extended release schedule for 1.19 resulted in only three minor Kubernetes
releases for 2020. As a result, SIG Release received several questions across a
variety of platforms and communication channels about whether the project
intends to only have three minor releases/year.

### Goals

#### Enhance determinism

With the current release cadence we already achieve a deterministic schedule
for every year. The goal of this KEP is to increase this even further by
providing a lightweight policy around creating the release schedule. Going
down to 3 releases provides additional room for triage, development, conference
and release cycle preparations, which should result in better overall planning
and more predictability.

#### Reduce risk

With higher predictability we can reduce the overall risk of changing the
release schedule. The planning overhead of SIG Release gets reduced, while
users of Kubernetes gain more time to adapt to the latest release.

The current Kubernetes release cadence is so fast that most organizations
cannot keep up with regularly making a minor version update every 3 months or

> going out of security support in a year. While releasing more frequently

Reviewer 2: I sort of disagree with this sentiment. We are saying that users cannot upgrade because releases are too fast *and* that the same users care about security support. The only reason to care about security support *is* so you can upgrade - so clearly these users are fine with regular upgrades, and in fact want them. What they are not fine with is hard+disruptive upgrades filled with breaking changes and risk

IMO, this proposal actually moves us in the opposite direction. By making fewer upgrades per year, each one now has more changes and more risk, making these users *less* likely to upgrade and exacerbating the problem.

Reviewer: Thank you for the input :pray:! We are aware of the mentioned risk and will do our best to mitigate them. We're still thinking that the proposal is the right move forward and that the benefits outweigh the mentioned concerns. :blush:

#### Concentrating risk

In theory a reduced release cadence will cause more changes for every release.
This means that there will be an increased risk, which would usually be split
up into 4 dedicated milestones rather than 3.

SIG Release cannot mitigate this risk directly, but is able to track and
influence it during each release cycle. It's the responsibility of SIG Release,
together with SIG Testing and SIG Architecture, to identify new gaps and issues
in the release cadence and mitigate them on a case-by-case basis.

#### Attention to tests

This KEP does not propose any change to the release cycle itself and assumes
that the same periods for Code and Test Freeze. Assuming that, there is an
increased risk for flakes and test failures. It will be the responsibility of
SIG Release to mitigate this, together with the CI signal role. If we speak
about an overall release cycle enhancement of 3-4 weeks, then we believe that
SIG Release is able to mitigate this risk over multiple releases.

#### Attention to dependencies

Having fewer releases will introduce the risk of missing dependencies — for
example, Golang upgrades. This has to be mitigated on a case-by-case basis, in

> the same way as it is being done right now.

Reviewer 3: Add:

#### Slowed Feature Advancement

Research discovered that [only 5% of Kubernetes features](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/1290#discussioncomment-336781) advanced from Alpha to GA in the minimum 3 releases.  However, the same research showed that reminders from the Release Team played a critical role in advancement of more than 50% of features.   With a 4-month release cycle, this reminder activity can be expected to slow down.  As such, advancement will need to be mitigated by somehow making sure that SIGs/authors remember to work on feature advancement by some other means.

Reviewer 4: Been working at this and would welcome a conversation and support :)

Reviewer 3: ah, we've been discussing it in sig-release separately.  should coordinate!

Reviewer 3: ALso ... please add text to the above if you have a plan!

Reviewer: Done, added a dedicated feature graduation section. :heavy_check_mark:

Reviewer 4: The ideas described here, created and adopted by SIGs across the project, can be helpful: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/37944bbefe93e77b635706c7357f4da37c0d3d3f/contributors/chairs-and-techleads/process-workflow-guide.md. The sections on KEP planning and roadmapping are based on some standard practices that enable teams to be proactive and transparent about their goal-setting in advance of deadlines. It would be great to see broader adoption of these general practices to help turn successful one-off approaches into norms. If we'd like to explore ways to encourage that adoption more systematically across the project, let's have that conversation—I'm confident it can be done in a way that preserves SIG autonomy / isn't top-down, onerous, or cookie-cutter.

At a personal level, I've recently been working with a few groups beyond SIG Release to establish some of the practices described in the process guide. These efforts are geared toward helping SIGs to get ahead of their workloads and plans, work more sustainably, be more consistently responsive to contributors and other SIGs, and mitigate risks. Groups that have requested and accepted the help include SIG Windows and the Structured Logging WG. More are in the immediate pipeline, and momentum appears to be building. My favoured approach is to start with an actual, specific delivery goal—setting up a new WG, breaking down a complex deliverable into something achievable within a given timeframe, organising splintered and scattered backlogs into coherent + prioritized roadmaps—and baking process change into that effort so that it's not distracting. 

Another idea being piloted right now is the Enhancements Liaison role. This idea is still crystallising, and is an effort to address some of the concerns about SIG responsiveness. In this role, time-boxed to a release cycle, a contributor embeds with a specific SIG (ideally one they are willing to stay with long-term) and commits during the cycle to support chairs in coordinating and communicating with the release team. These contributors will be onboarded and supported during 1.22. A few SIGs (Autoscaling, Windows) have expressed interest in working with a liaison and a few others are considering it. I understand that an untested idea doesn't make for a compelling argument, but it's a start.

them in the provided constraints of SIG Architecture.

The new release schedule will add room for only a few more weeks of
development.
SIGs should focus on using those additional weeks to enhance documentation and
testing (stability) - not on adding more features. These decisions are not part
of any SIG Release planning and will therefore be considered out of scope.

#### Architecture changes

Changing any architecture of Kubernetes—for example, decoupling its core
components from the k/k repository—is outside the scope of this KEP.

#### Modifying SIG Architecture policies

Any policy change made by SIG Architecture is out of scope of this KEP. This
non-goal corresponds partially to the [Changing enhancements
graduation](#changing-enhancements-graduation) section.

#### Accelerated release cycles

The intent of this proposal is to create more opportunities to provide a
high-value experience for Kubernetes consumers.

The Kubernetes community faces a reasonable amount of tech debt across
infrastructure, testing, policy, and documentation. This KEP proposes that we
spend more time paying down that debt.

SIG Release currently produces releases at the following cadence:

> - patch releases (`x.y.Z`): [monthly][https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases/patch-releases.md]
> - minor releases (`x.Y.z`): [every four months][https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/release-engineering/versioning.md]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- patch releases (`x.y.Z`): [monthly](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases/patch-releases.md)
- minor releases (`x.Y.z`): [every four months](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/release-engineering/versioning.md)
```

Reviewer 6: fixed!

SIG Release is able to mitigate this risk over multiple releases.

#### Attention to dependencies

Having fewer releases will introduce the risk of missing dependencies — for
example, Golang upgrades. This has to be mitigated on a case-by-case basis, in
the same way as it is being done right now.

#### Feature graduation

Research discovered that only 5% of Kubernetes features advanced from Alpha to
GA in the minimum 3 releases. However, the same research showed that reminders
from the Release Team played a critical role in advancement of more than 50% of
features. With an increased release cycle, this reminder activity can be
expected to slow down. As such, advancement will need to be mitigated by making
sure that SIGs keep track of their feature enhancement in more detail.

## Design Details

### Schedule Policy

The exact details of the release schedule are created by the team leads before
the actual cycle begins. SIG Release only provides a lightweight policy, which
is defined as:

1. The first Kubernetes release of a year should start at the second or third
   week of January to provide people more room after coming back from the

>    Christmas holidays.

Reviewer 5: It seems implicit that we will adopt this schedule at the beginning of next calendar year, i.e. takes effect in 2022. Is that an accurate interpretation and if so, can we make this explicit?

Reviewer 6: The intent is to start with 1.22 I believe, ( so not 2022). Should we clarify that this will start with the 1.22 cycle?

Reviewer 6: In the summary toward the top of the KEP, I added an explicit statement that this will start with the 1.22 release cycle.

2. The last Kubernetes release of a year should be finished by the middle of
   December.

3. A Kubernetes release cycle has a length of of ~15 weeks.

4. Events like KubeCon will be considered as blocked from development or
   decision-making from the SIG release perspective. SIG Release will also
   consider the week before and after the event in the same way.

5. An explicit SIG release break of at least two weeks between each cycle will
   be enforced.

   This does not mean that zero development can happen during that time.
   Rather, SIG Release will use this time to do the release retrospective and
   plan for the next cycle.

> 

Reviewer 5: Please add an example here. I'm looking for something like the following (my interpretation of what's written above:

## k8s releases, 2022

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week |
| - | - | - |
| 2 | 1 | 1 (Jan. 10) |
| 16 | 1 | 15 (Apr. 18) |
| 18 | 2 | 1 (May 2) |
| 33 | 2 | 15 (Aug. 15) |
| 35 | 3 | 1 (Aug. 29) |
| 50 | 3 | 15 (Dec. 12) |

The most interesting thing I found when putting this table together is that there was no "easy" way to block off KubeCons.

Reviewer 6: Since the intent is implement this starting with 1.22, would a chart showing this year and 2022 be useful?

Reviewer 3: Er, whose intent?  I'd assumed (and I think everyone else did too) that, given that this KEP isn't even merged yet, that we plan to implement 4-month releases starting with 1.25 in 1Q 2022.  Starting with 4-month releases in 2021 would be very confusing for everyone involved, unless it somehow just happens to line up with the calendar we want if we started in 1.23.

Reviewer 3: Leaving aside any time that our project needs to prepare for a change to release cadence, consider that we have downstreams.

Reviewer 7: can we resolve this conversation now?

Reviewer 3: We *still* need a calendar in the KEP, even if (I think) we have consensus on that calendar now.

Reviewer 6: I’ve added a table with dates for 2021 and 2022, but just start and end. What granularity are you looking for, and does it need to move to a different location/have a specific header for table of contents?

Reviewer 7: i am happy with what's in the KEP so far. wrapping this up.

### Feedback survey

SIG Release will draft an experience survey after the first three releases from
which the new cadence has been applied. This survey which will include questions
around the release cadence and how it impacted end users.

Survey contents are to be determined, but we welcome content suggestions to
continually improve the process.

## Implementation History

> 

Reviewer 5: Add a link to the # releases discussion?

Reviewer 6: Added a link to the GitHub discussion, thank you for suggesting that!

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

With this KEP, SIG Release proposes to change the current Kubernetes release
cadence from 4 down to 3 releases per year.

## Motivation

Discussions around changing the release cadence for Kubernetes, which currently
releases 4 times per year, are ongoing in the community.

The extended release schedule for 1.19 resulted in only three minor Kubernetes
releases for 2020. As a result, SIG Release received several questions across a
variety of platforms and communication channels about whether the project
intends to only have three minor releases/year.

### Goals

#### Enhance determinism

With the current release cadence we already achieve a deterministic schedule
for every year. The goal of this KEP is to increase this even further by
providing a lightweight policy around creating the release schedule. Going
down to 3 releases provides additional room for triage, development, and

> explicit breaks, which should result in better overall planning and more

Reviewer: We mean the time-wise break between releases as well as for conferences. I rephrase to:

| Going down to 3 releases provides additional room for triage, development, conference and release cycle preparations, which should result in better overall planning and more predictability.

predictability.

#### Reduce risk

With higher predictability we can reduce the overall risk of changing the
release schedule. The planning overhead of SIG Release gets reduced, while
users of Kubernetes gain more time to adapt to the latest release.

The current Kubernetes release cadence is so fast that most organizations

> cannot keep up with regularly making a minor version update every 3 months or

Reviewer 2: I am a bit confused by this, it sounds like the only two possibilities are "update every 3 months" or "out of support". Can't you skip updates and be in support? Like 1.15 -> 1.18 -> 1.21, etc. Maybe you need to go from 1.15 -> 1.16 -> 1.17 -> 1.18 to stay in the supported version skew, but that can be seen as one (long) operation if you do it sequentially?

Reviewer: Yes, skipping releases seems to be a common workaround for some organizations, but it implies some drawbacks like you already mentioned the version skew. I think it should not be best practice, and we try to address this issue with lowering the cadence. :blush:

going out of security support in a year. While releasing more frequently
theoretically reduces the churn and risk of each release, this is only true if

> end users are actually able to apply the upgrades.

Reviewer 8: yeah, the upgrade history is something I think we should really focus, but that is material for another KEP

Reviewer: Thank you for the input! We should follow-up with the other SIGs after this KEP has been merged. :+1:

#### Collecting data

After this KEP is in place, SIG Release will follow up with a survey to collect

> feedback about the new release cadence.

Reviewer 9: My understanding from the Feedback survey section is that we will collect the feedback after the `.0` release is out, not after this KEP is merged.

Additionally and relatively related to this point, I think we should link to already collected data, i.e. to discussions related to the release cadence. I'm aware of https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/1290 and there were also some polls and discussions on Twitter. I'm fully-aware those are informal (especially Twitter polls), but we received a lot of great feedback there and it would be nice to show how we decided about this.

Reviewer: Rephrased the sentence to collect the data after the first `.0` release :heavy_check_mark: 

The second point you mentioned is something we can follow-up (maybe together with @aojea) to define the right set of metrics and evaluate them.

#### Creating a policy

The outcome of this KEP is a policy for creating release schedules for
Kubernetes.
This allows the release team, as well as users, to follow a set of simple rules
when it comes to knowing when and how Kubernetes releases will be scheduled.

### Non-Goals

#### Long-term support (LTS) releases

The LTS Working Group was
[disbanded](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5240) on October 20,
2020.

The outcome of their conversations was the proposal which established a

> [yearly support period][/keps/sig-release/1498-kubernetes-yearly-support-period/README.md]

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
[yearly support period](/keps/sig-release/1498-kubernetes-yearly-support-period/README.md)
```

Reviewer: Fixed as suggested :+1:

for minor releases of the project.

While we may revisit the idea in the future, for now we trust the 2+ years of
thoughtful deliberation by the working group enough to conclude that the
project is not currently in a place to support long-term support releases.

#### Changing enhancements graduation

This KEP will not change the way that enhancements are being graduated. It's
the responsibility of SIGs to keep track of their enhancements and graduate
them in the provided constraints of SIG Architecture.

The new release schedule will add room for only a few more weeks of
development.
SIGs should focus on using those additional weeks to enhance documentation and

> testing (stability)—not on adding more features. These decisions are not part

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
testing (stability) — not on adding more features. These decisions are not part
```

Reviewer: Fixed as suggested :+1:

of any SIG Release planning and will therefore be considered out of scope.

#### Architecture changes

Changing any architecture of Kubernetes—for example, decoupling its core
components from the k/k repository—is outside the scope of this KEP.

#### Modifying SIG Architecture policies

Any policy change made by SIG Architecture is out of scope of this KEP. This
non-goal corresponds partially to the [Changing enhancements
graduation](#changing-enhancements-graduation) section.

#### Accelerated release cycles

The intent of this proposal is to create more opportunities to provide a
high-value experience for Kubernetes consumers.

The Kubernetes community faces a reasonable amount of tech debt across
infrastructure, testing, policy, and documentation. This KEP proposes that we

> spend more time paying down that debt.

Reviewer 8: I would love that, how can we be sure we achieve it?

Reviewer: The release cycle needs to provide the right frame for the overall project. I think with this KEP we relax the time restrictions, which should result in follow-up discussions within the SIGs to use that time for tackling tech debt. In the end it will be only "some weeks more" for development, but maybe a SIG could use that time especially in the beginning of the cycle to work on this topic.

Let's follow-up together within the SIGs. 

(Feel free to reopen this discussion if that's not sufficient for you)

Establishing a shorter maintenance/stability release at the end of the year has
been casually discussed at several points in the project, with the most recent
(at the time of writing) occurrence being
[here](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/809).

Nothing compelling has emerged from previous conversations to give cause to
establish maintenance/stability releases.

Fixing bugs, stabilizing components, adding/deflaking tests, improving
documentation, and graduating features are activities that can and should
happen in a reasonably consistent manner throughout the year.

#### Determining an upper bound for Release Team shadows

It was noted that fewer releases for the year would lead to fewer opportunities
to participate on the Release Team.

This will be discussed and addressed in
https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1494.

## Proposal

### User Stories

Kubernetes releases are made by real people. The technical aspects—for example,
the release automation—reflects only a tiny part of the complete cycle. This
means we will mainly focus on the human aspects and their corresponding roles
when deciding to move to a 3-releases-per-year cadence.

#### End User

> Most companies are facing issues upgrading Kubernetes 4 times a year. Providing

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Most end user organizations find it difficult to match Kubernetes release cadence -
this either means upgrading Kubernetes 4 times each year, or waiting until their 
platform is almost out of support and then running a series of upgrades, perhaps
under time pressure. Providing
```
(I think this suggested text is more accurate, but it's really a nit - the KEP can merge with the current wording).

Reviewer: Fixed as suggested :+1:

only 3 releases per year will relax this situation.

#### Distributors and downstream projects

Downstream projects assemble their solution from different projects. Having
fewer upgrades helps them to reduce complexity. For example, cloud providers
will gain more room for upgrading their infrastructure.

#### Contributors

With a lower release cadence, contributors will gain more time for project
enhancements, feature development, planning, and testing. It will provide more

> room for maintaining their mental health and prepare for events like KubeCon.

Reviewer 8: that is very happy scenario, I doubt lot of people is 100% kubernetes focused, there is a big load of downstream work

Reviewer: I know, I rephrased the sentence to:

> It will provide more room for maintaining their mental health, prepare for events like KubeCon or work on the downstream integration.

Through this proposal SIG Release's aim is to give contributors more
flexibility to decide how to invest their time. It is explicitly *not* to push

> contributors in doing more.

Reviewer 8: I will add a metric with the number of requests for exceptions after code freeze, this will give us a good idea if there is a correlation between release cadence and contributor time.

Reviewer 11: I'll just point out that this metric is greatly influenced by the enhancements process overhaul that has been happening and while is something good to look at in this context, it's not necessarily as reflective of cadence change as it may seem.

Reviewer: Thanks for the thoughts @aojea and @kikisdeliveryservice, let's follow up on the topic as already discussed. :+1:

#### SIG Release members

By applying a cadence of 3 releases per year, SIG Release members will gain a
reduced management overhead. There are also only 3 patch releases to maintain,
which right now can overlap up to 4. SIG Release will gain more time to ensure
a seamless transition from the previous release team to the next one. It is
also possible to include more shadows if the role leads conclude that this is
appropriate.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 8: how can we know measure that the change in release cadence was successful?
what is the mitigation? do we roll back to the previous release cadence?

Reviewer: As already discussed, let's follow up on collecting the right metrics and evaluate them when the KEP is in place and some release cycles provide meaningful data for us.

#### Concentrating risk

In theory a reduced release cadence will cause more changes for every release.
This means that there will be an increased risk, which would usually be split
up into 4 dedicated milestones rather than 3.

SIG Release cannot mitigate this risk directly, but is able to track and
influence it during each release cycle. It's the responsibility of SIG Release,
together with SIG Testing and SIG Architecture, to identify new gaps and issues
in the release cadence and mitigate them on a case-by-case basis.

#### Attention to tests

This KEP does not propose any change to the release cycle itself and assumes
that the same periods for Code and Test Freeze. Assuming that, there is an
increased risk for flakes and test failures. It will be the responsibility of

> SIG Release to mitigate this, together with the CI signal role. If we speak

Reviewer 8: what is the mitigation?

Reviewer 3: yeah, I think we need specific goals and practices for this.  I'll draft something.

Reviewer: Awesome, I think we can follow-up on this issue together offline, looking forward to the draft :blush:

Reviewer 3: I started an email thread on this, nobody but stephen has commented on it

about an overall release cycle enhancement of 3-4 weeks, then we believe that
SIG Release is able to mitigate this risk over multiple releases.

#### Attention to dependencies

Having fewer releases will introduce the risk of missing dependencies—for
example, Golang upgrades. This has to be mitigated on a case-by-case basis, in

> the same way as it is being done right now.

Reviewer 8: yeah, this seems orthogonal to the release cadence, just random

Reviewer: Alright, I think in any case we cannot be more specific here. Let me resolve this discussion and feel free to come back if you think this needs more refinement.

## Design Details

### Schedule Policy

The exact details of the release schedule are created by the team leads before
the actual cycle begins. SIG Release only provides a lightweight policy, which
is defined as:

1. The first Kubernetes release of a year should start at the second or third
   week of January to provide people more room after coming back from the
   Christmas holidays.

2. The last Kubernetes release of a year should be finished by the middle of

>    December.

Reviewer 8: do we have master close 1 month?

Reviewer: No, the release cycle will be planned separately and I assume that we stick to the current timings.

3. A Kubernetes release cycle has a length of of ~15 weeks.

4. Events like KubeCon will be considered as blocked from development or
   decision-making. SIG Release will also consider the week before and after

>    the event in the same way.

Reviewer 8: in which sense?
is it that you can not review or merge?

Reviewer 3: again, this seems orthagonal to this KEP, and could be cut.  We already do this.

Reviewer 13: I have the same question about what is meant by this

Reviewer 14: i assume this is referring to sig release itself, but not the flow of PRs, etc in the main branch or supported release branches?

Reviewer: Exactly as @derekwaynecarr said, SIG release will not decide what other SIGs are going to do during that time. But we just want to point out explicitly that the usual responsiveness from the SIG is not the same during that time.

5. An explicit break of at least two weeks between each release cycle will be
   enforced.

   This does not mean that zero development can happen during that time.
   Rather, SIG Release will use this time to do the release retrospective and

>    plan for the next cycle.

Reviewer 8: is this a sig-release break or a project break?
what is the impact on developers that sig-release takes this break?

Reviewer 3: Wait, why?  Not that we don't usually have this break de-facto, but what's the value in enforcing one if the new RT is ready to go?

Reviewer 11: The new RT is generally not ready to go as the RT as a whole works until the end of the cycle. I read this as giving the team explicit time to regroup and set the next team up for success by not plowing forward without a break.

Reviewer: @aojea yes, this is meant to be a SIG Release brek.

@jberkus In fact we already did this, my idea was to document it more clearly to the community.

Reviewer 3: OK.  But again ... leave it out of the KEP.  The KEP should only document the things that are changing as a consequence of 4-month releases.  If we add in a lot of extraneous stuff, it makes it impossible for folks to evaluate it.

Reviewer: I rephrased the point a bit, I'm not sure about removing it. The `Schedule Policy` should be used mainly by SIG Release members to plan the cycle. It was an unwritten rule to have a break, but now we have it within the policy. :upside_down_face:

### Feedback survey

Each minor Kubernetes release will be an experience survey, which will include

> questions around the release cadence.

Reviewer 8: we need objective metrics, subjective only is not useful ... unless you have people that is expert in surveys, the audience sample is significative, .... that is a science

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we try to over-analyze the situation. Right now we do not actively track those metrics over the past releases. What we do, is using "alerting moments" (let's say we had many issues in the previous test-freeze) to adjust the next release schedule. This already provides us a fair amount of flexibility for such a rapid growing community and project.

What should we do with those metrics? I doubt that we use the metrics for 1.14 to make decisions about the 1.22 release cycle. We would have to analyze so many more factors beside the plain stats, for example the size of the features, the amount of PRs merged in general or which enhancements have been tracked and how many people were working on them.

Reviewer 8: > I doubt that we use the metrics for 1.14 to make decisions about the 1.22 release cycle

I'm not meaning that,  metrics are for avoid this happening again, we can't change the past, but we should learn from it. If we define the 4 or 5 points we want to improve, we can measure it and take decisions based on data. This is a polemic decision because nobody can demonstrate their point, everything is vague and based on feelings and experiences ... 

> We would have to analyze so many more factors beside the plain stats,

Is the other way around, you don't need hundred metrics, you just need to pick a small number of them that are able to demonstrate your hypothesis, and iterate, revisit, .... and next time we can say "hey, we need to reduce/increase the release cadence because X is higher, Y is lower and Z is increasing ...."

Per example, in this case we are claiming that the change in the release cadence will:
- give more time to work on the features and not rush it, so `number of exceptions requests` can give us an idea if this is right or not, if we have more exception requests after the change that before it means clearly that argument was wrong
- improve quality because sigs will have more time for testing, tech debt, ... so `number of issues open during code/test freeze` will tell us if that is true or we keep pushing to the latest .
- .....

Reviewer: @aojea looks like you already have a plan in mind how to approach this kind of metrics evaluation. Do we wanna move it into a dedicated issue in k/sig-release and are you happy to work on this topic?

Reviewer 8: > @aojea looks like you already have a plan in mind how to approach this kind of metrics evaluation

That is based on experience, after lots of tries and success, but that worked fine for us in other similar project 

> move it into a dedicated issue in k/sig-release and are you happy to work on this topic?

sure, I need some time, but I will do it

Thanks

Reviewer: Thank you! I'll resolve this discussion for now and we follow up.

Reviewer: Created a follow-up issue in SIG release: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1527 Feel free to add your thoughts there, too.

> questions around the release cadence.

Reviewer 13: It's not clear to me what changes the collected data is expected to drive. Are you envisioning it informing the endpoints of release plans (like "3 releases per year") or some of the internal milestones (like "how many release candidates")?

A survey on each release that is expected to impact upcoming release schedules seems like it would make schedules less predictable and deterministic. There's also "survey fatigue" to consider, if this is trying to get feedback from the same consumers over and over.

Reviewer 11: Wondering it would make more sense to commit upfront to try to new cadence for X releases and then do a survey? Given the survey fatigue Jordan mentions above and also to give time for people to get used to it (ie change is hard).

Reviewer: Yes, I think it makes sense to make an end user survey after 3 releases. We already get feedback from the community around each cycle, but to maintain a broader picture it seems reasonable to focus on end-users. I rephrased the sentence to:

> SIG Release will draft an experience survey after the first three releases from
which the new cadence has been applied. This survey which will include questions
around the release cadence and how it impacted end users.

Survey contents are to be determined, but we welcome content suggestions to

> continually improve the process.

Reviewer 9: Related to this, who is the target group for the feedback survey? Is it everyone, only end-users, only contributors?

Reviewer: Yes, it will be end-users focused. Fixed that in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2567/files#r608487270

Post-release surveys will close after the `.2` patch release to allow the team
sufficient time to process and incorporate feedback.

Using Kubernetes v1.19 date to provide an example of the survey timeline:

- 2020-08-26: v1.19.0 released (survey would go out)
- 2020-09-09: v1.19.1 released

> - 2020-09-16: v1.19.2 released (survey would close)

Reviewer 13: by the time the .2 release occurs, we're typically a month into the next release dev cycle, right? I'm not sure I understand what the survey would be asking and what plans we'd be expecting to modify based on the results.

Reviewer: I think this point is obsolete of we say we do an end user survey every 3 releases.

With this example, the survey would have been open for three weeks.
With an extended release cycle, post-release surveys would be open for around

> three to six weeks (depending on the patch release schedule).

Reviewer 9: Why we bind to the `.2` patch release instead of defining a timeline, for example, 1 month after the `.0` release? As seen in the example, this is very unpredictable. This way we can't clearly communicate the deadline, which can be confusing. Users/contributors might not be aware of when the release will be out until it's not actually released, especially if we have out of cadence releases.

Reviewer: I think this point is obsolete of we say we do an end user survey every 3 releases.

influence it during each release cycle. It's the responsibility of SIG Release,
together with SIG Testing and SIG Architecture, to identify new gaps and issues
in the release cadence and mitigate them on a case-by-case basis.

#### Attention to tests

This KEP does not propose any change to the release cycle itself and assumes
that the same periods for Code and Test Freeze. Assuming that, there is an
increased risk for flakes and test failures. It will be the responsibility of
SIG Release to mitigate this, together with the CI signal role. If we speak
about an overall release cycle enhancement of 3-4 weeks, then we believe that
SIG Release is able to mitigate this risk over multiple releases.

#### Attention to dependencies

Having fewer releases will introduce the risk of missing dependencies — for
example, Golang upgrades. This has to be mitigated on a case-by-case basis, in
the same way as it is being done right now.

#### Feature graduation

Research discovered that only 5% of Kubernetes features advanced from Alpha to
GA in the minimum 3 releases. However, the same research showed that reminders
from the Release Team played a critical role in advancement of more than 50% of

> features. With an increased release cycle, this reminder activity can be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
features. With a longer release cycle, this reminder activity can be
```

Reviewer 3: the word "increased" is not clear in this context.

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Enhance determinism](#enhance-determinism)
    - [Reduce risk](#reduce-risk)
    - [Collecting data](#collecting-data)
    - [Creating a policy](#creating-a-policy)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
    - [Long-term support (LTS) releases](#long-term-support-lts-releases)
    - [Changing enhancements graduation](#changing-enhancements-graduation)
    - [Architecture changes](#architecture-changes)
    - [Modifying SIG Architecture policies](#modifying-sig-architecture-policies)
    - [Accelerated release cycles](#accelerated-release-cycles)
    - [Establishing maintenance/stability releases](#establishing-maintenancestability-releases)
    - [Determining an upper bound for Release Team shadows](#determining-an-upper-bound-for-release-team-shadows)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories](#user-stories)
    - [End User](#end-user)
    - [Distributors and downstream projects](#distributors-and-downstream-projects)
    - [Contributors](#contributors)
    - [SIG Release members](#sig-release-members)

>   - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)

Reviewer 6: Hey @kikisdeliveryservice do you think that you could contribute this language for inclusion in the KEP?

>   - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)

Reviewer 11: Added suggested language to Risks and Mitigations section as requested below.

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

With this KEP, SIG Release proposes to change the current Kubernetes release
cadence from 4 down to 3 releases per year. This would start with the 

> Kubernetes 1.22 release cycle.

Reviewer 15: Where was the starting release decided? I don't see that in the linked GitHub discussion.

Reviewer 6: Based on the discussions from Leads/TL meeting, sig-release leads assumed this date and the KEP is written to reflect this, with later commits adding more language around this. 

The "decision" would be the KEP merging. At this point, it seems like we need a more formal process for deciding this date/identifying who can be the final source of approval. Is this something steering can assist with?

Reviewer 7: @jeremyrickard wearing my steering hat, sig-arch, sig-release, sig-testing chairs should sign off, please add them as approvers.

( cc @kubernetes/steering-committee in case any other steering folks have other suggestions )

Reviewer 6: Thanks @dims, I will update the approvers section tomorrow.

intends to only have three minor releases/year.

### Goals

#### Enhance determinism

With the current release cadence we already achieve a deterministic schedule
for every year. The goal of this KEP is to increase this even further by
providing a lightweight policy around creating the release schedule. Going
down to 3 releases provides additional room for triage, development, conference
and release cycle preparations, which should result in better overall planning
and more predictability.

#### Reduce risk

With higher predictability we can reduce the overall risk of changing the
release schedule. The planning overhead of SIG Release gets reduced, while
users of Kubernetes gain more time to adapt to the latest release.

The current Kubernetes release cadence is so fast that most organizations
cannot keep up with regularly making a minor version update every 3 months or
going out of security support in a year. While releasing more frequently
theoretically reduces the churn and risk of each release, this is only true if
end users are actually able to apply the upgrades.

#### Collecting data

After this KEP is in place and the first three minor (`1.x.0`) versions have

> been released, SIG Release will follow up with a survey to collect feedback

Reviewer 6: I'm torn on the survey now, because of the points you have raised (and some others).

Does the community even have an effective way to conduct such a survey that would be fully inclusive and not leave out end users and contributors who are not plugged in?

> been released, SIG Release will follow up with a survey to collect feedback

Reviewer 11: Not that I know of, but could definitely survey all SIGs/SIG leads and send survey to k-dev at a min?

> been released, SIG Release will follow up with a survey to collect feedback

Reviewer 16: On top of those issues - many end-users won't be caught up, so the overall quality-of-life impact may not yet be known.

> been released, SIG Release will follow up with a survey to collect feedback

Reviewer 7: I think we can drop the survey stuff from this KEP, it is for setting up a `Schedule Policy` so let's leave it at that please

> been released, SIG Release will follow up with a survey to collect feedback

Reviewer 7: @jeremyrickard Do we want to pick one way or another and resolve this discussion please?

about the new release cadence.

#### Creating a policy

> 

Reviewer 6: I think in terms of policy it's basically codifying a few things (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/7e1b190911e206c09c2ec81183f3887f0abd6dc3/keps/sig-release/2572-release-cadence/README.md#schedule-policy):

* Three releases per year
* Each release is ~15 weeks
* Guidance on when each set of releases should start (2 or 3 week of January)
* When it should end (mid December)

It's not a generic policy about how to chance cadences in the future, I think this is very strictly scoped to the change at hand, and adding some concrete details that were more ad-hoc for 2020. 

A more generic policy, I think, would be a new KEP.

potentially accelerate production of releases, please join the discussion
[here](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/1495).

#### Establishing maintenance/stability releases

Establishing a shorter maintenance/stability release at the end of the year has
been casually discussed at several points in the project, with the most recent
(at the time of writing) occurrence being
[here](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/809).

Nothing compelling has emerged from previous conversations to give cause to
establish maintenance/stability releases.

Fixing bugs, stabilizing components, adding/deflaking tests, improving
documentation, and graduating features are activities that can and should
happen in a reasonably consistent manner throughout the year.

#### Determining an upper bound for Release Team shadows

It was noted that fewer releases for the year would lead to fewer opportunities
to participate on the Release Team.

This will be discussed and addressed in
https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1494.

## Proposal

The following tables detail a notional timeline for the remainder of 2021 and 

> for 2020, leveraging the historical *4-releases-per-year cadence*. Generally, 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
for 2022, leveraging the historical *4-releases-per-year cadence*. Generally, 
```

code freeze remains in effect until the last week of the release, so 
development for the next release generally starts prior to the official release 
team kickoff. A minimum of 1 week is needed between releases to fully form the 
release team and to facilitate on-boarding of shadows. The fourth release of 
the year has traditionally been compressed and limited in scope, overlapping 

> with of end of year holidays and vacation for many contributors. Additionally, 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
with end of year holidays and vacation for many contributors. Additionally, 
```

> KubeCon normally occurs during at least one release, eliminating a week of 

Reviewer 10: I think that counting Kubecons as only one work of working time spent is a bit low, because of the extent to which very active contribtors to the project are probably very active Kubecon participants.

There's the week before of "get everything ready for the big show", and the week after of "integrate everything you learned while you were there into your todo list", where people probably aren't as productive as they normally would be.

That's really important for the timing calculations below.

Reviewer 6: Indeed, the policy states:

```
Events like KubeCon will be considered as blocked from development or decision-making from the SIG release perspective. SIG Release will also consider the week before and after the event in the same way.
```

I'll add language to state that the release team will not meet during that blocked week and clarify the other two weeks. In the past we didn't break, and I think this change has been beneficial but it consumes time. 

Thanks @youngnick I'll fold this in.

working time.

*Kubernetes Release Sechedule 2021 (Existing 4 Release Cadence)*

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week | Note |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2     | 1     | 1 (January 11) | |
| 14 | 1 | 13 (April 8) | |
| 16 | 2 | 1 (April 19) | |
| 27 | 2 | 11 (July 06) | One week break for KubeCon EU - 10 weeks of working | 
| 29 | 3 | 1 (July 20) | |
| 40 | 3 | 11 (October 5) | | 
| 42 | 4 | 1 (October 18) | |
| 52 | 4 | 10 (December 28) | End of Year Holidays |

*Kubernetes Release Sechedule 2022 (Existing 4 Release Cadence)*

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week | Note |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 1  | 1 | 1 (January 3) | |
| 12 | 1 | 12 (March 15) | |
| 14 | 2 | 1 (March 28) | Probable KubeCon EU |
| 26 | 2 | 12 (June 28) | |
| 28 | 3 | 1 (July 11) | | 
| 40 | 3 | 12 (October 4) | | 
| 42 | 4 | 1 (October 17) | Probably KubeCon NA | 
| 52 | 4 | 10 (Dec 28) | | 

This KEP proposes a transition to a *3-releases-per-year cadence*, beginning 
with the Kubernetes 1.22 Release. This would result in a *15* week release 
cycle, with *2* weeks between release cycles.

> *Kubernetes Release Sechedule 2021 (Proposed 3 Release Cadence)*

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
*Kubernetes Release Schedule 2021 (Proposed 3 Release Cadence)*
```

#### Distributors and downstream projects

Downstream projects assemble their solution from different projects. Having
fewer upgrades helps them to reduce complexity. For example, cloud providers
will gain more room for upgrading their infrastructure.

#### Contributors

With a lower release cadence, contributors will gain more time for project
enhancements, feature development, planning, and testing. It will provide more
room for maintaining their mental health, prepare for events like KubeCon or
work on the downstream integration.

Through this proposal SIG Release's aim is to give contributors more
flexibility to decide how to invest their time. It is explicitly _not_ to push
contributors in doing more.

#### SIG Release members

By applying a cadence of 3 releases per year, SIG Release members will gain a
reduced management overhead. There are also only 3 patch releases to maintain,
which right now can overlap up to 4. SIG Release will gain more time to ensure
a seamless transition from the previous release team to the next one. It is
also possible to include more shadows if the role leads conclude that this is
appropriate.

### Risks and Mitigations

> 

Reviewer 11: I'd like to see a Risk addressing not adequately communicating the decision in advance and what steps we're taking to ensure this isn't disruptive to the community & downstream.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
#### Late Notification of Cadence Change to Community and Downstream

This KEP is proposing changing the default release cadence from 3 to 4 during the period of time between releases. There is a risk that changing the default cadence will minimal notice will be disruptive to both the community and downstream. The notification and adjustment period will be very short (<1 week) for those expecting a traditional 4 cadence a year release schedule which would be expected to begin the week of April 19th.
```

Reviewer 11: @jeremyrickard PTAL I added language as requested, but unsure what the mitigation strategy for this is.

Reviewer 6: @kikisdeliveryservice I think we're all in agreement that it's too late to start with 1.22. Do you think the same content would be applicable if we apply the change in 1.23?

Alpha (1.22): communication, mitigate the downstream risks as much as possible through:
* blog post 
* community meeting (if they occur)
* k8s contributor tweet

Beta (1.23): make the transition to 3 release cadence (effectively just not doing the shortened 1.24)

Stable (which ever release that should be, if the requirement that things are "beta" for two releases applies, then 1.25).

Reviewer 13: > I think we're all in agreement that it's too late to start with 1.22.

Too late to start the four month cadence? We started that with 1.19.

Reviewer 6: @liggitt I meant "officially" without proper communication and agreement from folks. The reality is exactly what you just stated.

Reviewer 11: @jeremyrickard I think the alpha comms would be a (sort of) mitigation :+1:

Reviewer 7: looks like a pending discussion to be resolved here?

Reviewer 6: @kikisdeliveryservice you ok to resolve this one now? we added some concrete communication avenues.

#### Concentrating risk

In theory a reduced release cadence will cause more changes for every release.
This means that there will be an increased risk, which would usually be split
up into 4 dedicated milestones rather than 3.

SIG Release cannot mitigate this risk directly, but is able to track and
influence it during each release cycle. It's the responsibility of SIG Release,
together with SIG Testing and SIG Architecture, to identify new gaps and issues
in the release cadence and mitigate them on a case-by-case basis.

#### Attention to tests

This KEP does not propose any change to the release cycle itself and assumes
that the same periods for Code and Test Freeze. Assuming that, there is an
increased risk for flakes and test failures. It will be the responsibility of

> SIG Release to mitigate this, together with the CI signal role. If we speak

Reviewer 17: FTR - we're looking at it in WG Reliability group too - we're setting up a some tooling as we speak and are planning to propose https://docs.google.com/document/d/1P0GICwewHVYrlgsc_XJlLA3h_fOKub3sGkuogSPIliU/edit more officially soon.

@deads2k @stevekuznetsov

Reviewer 6: Thanks for that input @wojtek-t!

## Design Details

### Schedule Policy

The exact details of the release schedule are created by the team leads before
the actual cycle begins. SIG Release only provides a lightweight policy, which
is defined as:

1. The first Kubernetes release of a year should start at the second or third
   week of January to provide people more room after coming back from the
   Christmas holidays.

2. The last Kubernetes release of a year should be finished by the middle of
   December.

3. A Kubernetes release cycle has a length of of ~15 weeks.

4. Events like KubeCon will be considered as blocked from development or
   decision-making from the SIG release perspective. SIG Release will also
   consider the week before and after the event in the same way.

5. An explicit SIG release break of at least two weeks between each cycle will
   be enforced.

   This does not mean that zero development can happen during that time.
   Rather, SIG Release will use this time to do the release retrospective and
   plan for the next cycle.

### Feedback survey

SIG Release will draft an experience survey after the first three releases from

> which the new cadence has been applied. This survey which will include questions

Reviewer 11: As noted above I think the timing of the feedback survey needs to be fleshed out a bit.  I worry about it happening between releases (does that mean it's going to affect the next one? or the one after for a notice period?). 

Also if the new cadence begins with 1.22, that would mean we'd potentially be changing cadence back in mid 2022? Feels like in that case taking stock towards the end of 1.23 (EOY release) would make more sense to move forward in 2023 with a solid plan for the entire year?

Kubernetes effectively moved to a *3 release per year* cadence in 2020, starting 
with the Kubernetes 1.19 release. At the start of the Kubernetes 1.21 release, 
there was communication that a permanent cadence change was under consideration, 
however this KEP was not submitted and approved within the Kubernetes 1.21 release 
cycle, so there is a risk that downstream consumers may be unaware that such a 
change was under consideration and could be caught by surprise by a cadence change. 
Some downstream projects, such as Helm have already begun 
[planning](https://github.com/helm/community/blob/main/hips/hip-0002.md#minor-releases) 
for this change.

To mitigate this risk, SIG-Release will perform the following actions:

* Once this KEP has merged, an email will be sent to the [k/dev](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-dev) list
* A community meeting occurring during the 1.22 Release Cycle will be used to communicate the change
* Early in the Kubernetes 1.22 Release cycle, a blog will be written and published to 
https://kubernetes.io/blog/ that fully explains this change.
* A tweet (linking to the blog) will sent from the k8scontributors twitter account

> 

Reviewer 16: Risk: Increased risk-taking in enhancement lifecycle.  On the 4-release cadence, a relatively trivial enhancement could move from alpha to beta to GA in 9 months, with truly trivial features sometimes skipping beta.  On the proposed 3-release cadence, The best possible case is 12 months for a 3-phase features and 8 months if skipping beta.  These drawn out timelines may cause more features to skip beta or take more risks in advancing phases, even when not confident.  The cost of "missing the boat" goes up.  The only mitigation here is human vigilance and engineering discipline to hold the line and say "no" when appropriate.  This is VERY difficult and not to be trivialized.

Reviewer: Added the risk to the KEP as suggested.

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

With this KEP, SIG Release proposes to change the current Kubernetes release
cadence from 4 down to 3 releases per year. This cadence started in ad-hoc manner

> in 2020, and will be formalized with the KEP. This will be reflected in the 

Reviewer 7: `ad-hoc manner` -> `ad-hoc manner on account of the pandemic situation` (expand the context a bit?)

Reviewer 6: This is a great suggestion, thanks. I'll add this in my next update.

Reviewer 6: added!

release calendar for the Kubernetes 1.22 and 1.23 releases, which will each be 
*15* weeks in duration.

## Motivation

Discussions around changing the release cadence for Kubernetes, which currently
releases 4 times per year, are ongoing in the community.

The extended release schedule for 1.19 resulted in only three minor Kubernetes
releases for 2020. As a result, SIG Release received several questions across a
variety of platforms and communication channels about whether the project

> intends to only have three minor releases/year.

Reviewer 7: `releases/year` -> `releases/year as a lot of folks need to plan ahead (both developers and end users)` (expand a bit if appropriate?

Reviewer 6: added!

for patch and pre-releases.

If you'd like to provide suggestions on longer-term improvements that could
potentially accelerate production of releases, please join the discussion
[here](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/1495).

#### Establishing maintenance/stability releases

Establishing a shorter maintenance/stability release at the end of the year has
been casually discussed at several points in the project, with the most recent
(at the time of writing) occurrence being
[here](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/809).

Nothing compelling has emerged from previous conversations to give cause to
establish maintenance/stability releases.

Fixing bugs, stabilizing components, adding/deflaking tests, improving
documentation, and graduating features are activities that can and should
happen in a reasonably consistent manner throughout the year.

#### Determining an upper bound for Release Team shadows

It was noted that fewer releases for the year would lead to fewer opportunities
to participate on the Release Team.

This will be discussed and addressed in
https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1494.

## Proposal

> This KEP proposes a transition to a *3-releases-per-year cadence*, beginning 

Reviewer 7: do we need to say calendar year?

Reviewer 6: added!

2021 and 2022 are shown below:

*Kubernetes Release Schedule 2021 (Proposed 3 Release Cadence)*

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week | Note |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2  | 1 | 1 (January 11) | |
| 14 | 1 | 13 (April 8) | |
| 17 | 2 | 1 (April 26) | |
| 32 | 2 | 15 (August 02) | KubeCon EU Break (May 4-7) |
| 35 | 3 | 1 (August 30) | | 
| 50 | 3 | 15 (December 14) | Kubecon Break (Oct 12-15) | 

*Kubernetes Release Sechedule 2022 (Proposed 3 Release Cadence)*

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week | Note |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 1  | 1 | 1 (January 3) | |
| 15 | 1 | 15 (April 12) | | 
| 18 | 2 | 1 (May 2) | Probably KubeCon EU |
| 33 | 2 | 15 (August 15) | |
| 36 | 3 | 1 (September 6 | Probably KubeCon NA | 
| 51 | 3 | 15 (December 20) | 

This KEP will be in the `alpha` stage for the Kubernetes 1.22 Release. During 
this time, SIG-Release will focus on communication of the cadence change through
all available mechanisms. The KEP will promote to the `beta` stage for the 
Kubernetes 1.23 Release, which will be the final release of 2021. After 

> the 1.23, 1.24, and  1.25 Releases, will will collect feedback and incorporate 

Reviewer 11: @jeremyrickard Given that we already have feedback that this cadence may not work for people and given how hectic and disruptive mid-year changes are, wondering if it is better to try to do an EOY survey and have this finalized before moving into 2022? The current setup makes it feel v difficult for people to be able actually revert this if it goes wrong until 2023 (since 2/3 of the year would be over by the time the decision is made and quarters dont fit into thirds very well).

Reviewer 6: I agree that making the transition mid 2022 would not be great. The best approach to this and handling a revert is probably to approach it in a manner where we evaluate during the releases listed and then during the 1.26 release, we would either graduate this to stable OR we would take another action (revert to 4 releases per year, entertain 2 releases per year, entertain 10 releases per year), but such a cadence change would not start until the first release of 2023, to allow adequate communication and avoid any midyear confusion / pain. WDYT? I think running the surveys for several releases with accompanying communication will allow us to gather appropriate data and compare to cycles prior to 1.19?

Reviewer 6: Added a couple of sentences to address and clarify this @kikisdeliveryservice

Reviewer 11: Thanks for the update @jeremyrickard I think it's more honest about the ramifications of the current state (this isn't going to revert back midyear as it's very disruptive). One thing that troubles me is that if there are serious objections/hurdles that show this just isn't working out in alpha/early beta, there isn't a way to revert for the beginning of 2022. I'm not sure if anyone else shares this concern, but wanted to raise it.

Reviewer 3: So:  

Evaluation mid-2022 (1.25), decision on permanence (until we change it again, anyway) to take effect Jan 2023 (1.27)?

Reviewer 3: The alternative is to eval late 2021.  Question is whether we'll feel ready to evaluate it then.

Reviewer 6: We could try to eval late 2021, if we have sufficient data. If we want to provide ample notification time (6 months or more), how do we handle the change back? We would probably need to hold the first release to 15 weeks for predictability, then shift to 10-11 week releases?

Reviewer 18: Do we have a few tentative questions that we plan to ask in that survey (whenever it is decided to be sent out)? For example, one clear question is "Do you think the community should go forward with 3 releases/year? Yes/No/Maybe". We may have more on the lines of reviewer bandwidth.

What else can be the metrics which we gauge in the survey so that we can make an effective decision about the future of release cadence (continue or revert)?

Reviewer 8: > o you think the community should go forward with 3 releases/year? Yes/No/Maybe"

That is not a good question for a survey, because you are forcing to take a decision on something predetermined.

For this to work we should take into account the profile of the surveyed person, i.e. making up the numbers, if the Kubernetes market is 30% cloud providers, 30% software vendors, 30% in-house and 10% weekend hackers , we can't decide the release cadence on the latest ...

We also should get some information to be able to ponder the answer correctly: 
do you use your cluster in production? how many nodes?
A person with 2 nodes and nothing in production will not have the same problems that someone with 50 nodes with critical services in their company.

What is at stake here is the release model, Tim Hockin has a good comment exploring different alternative models, and we should get feedback on this, we are assuming that we want a fixed release model, but is on us to innovate/improve and think out of the box, what problem do we want to solve? how can we do it?

Coming back to the survey, I think that the question should be something like

> Kubernetes projects need your feedback to choose a release model, which one do you prefer and why?
> 1. 3 timeboxed releases per year and and EOL cycle of 1 year
> 2. 4 timeboxed releases per year
> 3. tick - tock release
> 4.  ....
> 5. blank so user can say why those models doesn't work and which one he suggests

Reviewer 7: let's please not litigate the contents of a survey we would send out later. If needed we can open another issue or a google doc and design the survey there.

Reviewer: Created an issue in https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/1526, feel free to comment there if I missed anything from the conversation. 

Resolving this discussion for now, let's focus on the KEP itself.

that feedback into the lightweight framework surrounding release schedule 

> development and promote this KEP to `stable` for the 1.26 Release. 

Reviewer 7: let's add a summary table like this? (after the paragraph above ... not instead, i like the commentary, we should keep it)

```
1.22 - Alpha 
1.23/1.24/1.25 - Beta
1.26 - Stable
```

Reviewer 6: added!

Reviewer 7: thanks!

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

With this KEP, SIG Release proposes to change the current Kubernetes release
cadence from 4 down to 3 releases per year. This cadence started in ad hoc manner
in 2020 due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This KEP serves to formalize this release 

> cadence, which will be shape the development of the release calendars for the 

Reviewer 9: This seems like a typo, but I'm not sure. It reads a bit strange to me.

```suggestion
cadence, which will shape the development of the release calendars for the 
```

Reviewer 6: cleaned up, thank you for the suggestion.

| 1  | 1 | 1 (January 3) | |
| 12 | 1 | 12 (March 15) | |
| 14 | 2 | 1 (March 28) | Probable KubeCon EU Break|
| 26 | 2 | 12 (June 28) | |
| 28 | 3 | 1 (July 11) | | 
| 40 | 3 | 12 (October 4) | | 
| 42 | 4 | 1 (October 17) | Probably KubeCon NA Break | 
| 52 | 4 | 10 (Dec 28) | | 

With the proposed change in cadence, the notional schedules for the remainder of
2021 and 2022 are shown below:

*Kubernetes Release Schedule 2021 (Proposed 3 Release Cadence)*

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week | Note |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2  | 1 | 1 (January 11) | |
| 14 | 1 | 13 (April 8) | |
| 17 | 2 | 1 (April 26) | |
| 32 | 2 | 15 (August 02) | KubeCon EU Break (May 4-7) |
| 35 | 3 | 1 (August 30) | | 
| 50 | 3 | 15 (December 14) | Kubecon Break (Oct 12-15) | 

*Kubernetes Release Sechedule 2022 (Proposed 3 Release Cadence)*

| Year Week Number | Release Number | Release Week | Note |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 1  | 1 | 1 (January 3) | |
| 15 | 1 | 15 (April 12) | | 
| 18 | 2 | 1 (May 2) | Probably KubeCon EU |
| 33 | 2 | 15 (August 15) | |
| 36 | 3 | 1 (September 6 | Probably KubeCon NA | 

> | 51 | 3 | 15 (December 20) | 

Reviewer 3: Er, you sure about a December 20th release date?  That seems very risky considering the proximity to the holidays. One hiccup and you're releasing in January.

Reviewer 13: yeah, anything past December 10thish seems really iffy to me.

Reviewer 6: Thanks for the input, I've updated this table to back that date up to the week of (Dec 06 - Dec 11)

* A tweet (linking to the blog) will sent from the k8scontributors twitter account

#### Increased enhancements lifecycle

With a 4 releases/year cadence, an enhancement could graduate from alpha to beta
to GA in 9 months, with truly trivial features sometimes skipping beta. On the
proposed 3 releases/year cadence, the best possible case is 12 months for a
3-phase features and 8 months if skipping beta if the graduation rules will not
change. These drawn out timelines may cause more features to skip beta or take
more risks in advancing phases, even when not confident. The mitigation here is
human vigilance and engineering discipline to hold the line and say "no" when
appropriate.

## Design Details

### Schedule Policy

The exact details of the release schedule are created by the team leads before
the actual cycle begins. SIG Release only provides a lightweight policy, which
is defined as:

1. The first Kubernetes release of a year should start at the second or third
   week of January to provide people more room after coming back from the
   Christmas holidays.

2. The last Kubernetes release of a year should be finished by the middle of

>    December.

Reviewer 9: In regards to comments from @jberkus and @liggitt (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2567#discussion_r616257381), I think that this should be defined more precisely. I think that choosing something like December 10th (as proposed by @liggitt) makes sense.

@johnbelamaric:

> The two points I bring up are in tension with each other. That is, the same
> features spread across fewer annual releases automatically means more per
> release, or longer duration in the pipeline.

@bowei:

> We should make sure that there are sufficient improvements/metrics/goals to meet w/ any change (or no change).
> It wouldn't be great if 4 -> 3 didn't improve things and the same rationales would justify 3 -> 2.
> Is there a bar where we can comfortably go back from 3 -> 4?

@onlydole:

> +1 for three releases a year, and all of this discussion is fantastic!
>
> I agree with there being three releases a year. However, I do think that having more regular minor version releases would be helpful, so there isn’t any rush to get things into a specific release, nor a blocker around shipping bugfixes or improvements.
>
> I’d like to propose a strongly scoped path for Alpha, Beta, and GA features. I believe that allowing for a bit more leniency for Alpha and Beta code promotion and more stringent requirements for features before they make GA status.

@jberkus:

> > @johnbelamaric everything you've said is valid. At the same time, though, my experience has been that the pressure goes the other way: features already linger in alpha or beta for way longer than they ought to. The push to get most features to GA -- or deprecate them -- really seems to be lacking. It's hard to pull stats for this, but most KEP-worthy features seem to take something like 2 years to get there. So from my perspective, more state changes per release would be a good thing (at least, more getting alpha features to beta/GA), even if we didn't change the number of releases per year.

Author: @LappleApple -- I know you've already made strides here through your discussions w/ other SIGs.

Do you have a tracking issue, mailing list conversation, or other breadcrumb at hand that I can work into this section as a reference point?
